Hey, don't you think the most important thing to cooperate with AI is to make the order clear?
But to be honest, this is actually only half right.
The real challenge or the real headache is
when AI responds to you, how do you know
whether the answer it gives you is a divine assist or a super big trouble?
That's right, this is what we're going to talk about today.
You know, AI is really strong, there's nothing to say about this.
But it has a wonderful feature.
When it makes a mistake, it's so confident that it's even more secure than you and me.
So here's the question.
How are we going to tell if AI is really right?
Or is it just a serious mess?
Okay, so how do we solve this trust problem?
In fact, the key is to train a super important core skill.
You can imagine it as a safety net.
With it, we can really exert the power of AI,
instead of being led by it.
So you see, the key point is out.
The point is not just that you will give orders.
More importantly, it's actually how we judge what AI gives us.
This judgment is the core that really decides whether we cooperate or not.
Okay, so the so-called judgment,
we give it a special noun called AI思辨能力.
What the hell is this?
Let's talk about it.
The so-called思辨能力, to be honest, is a kind of assessment ability.
What is it?
It's the process that AI produces for you.
It's even the behavior of interacting with you.
I think there's a metaphor that's super close.
Just imagine it as your own AI control system.
Yes, it's a control system.
It's used to ensure that every step AI takes is on the right track.
Okay, we can think of it like this.
Interacting with AI is basically two things.
The first one is called the description ability.
This is to make a request.
It's very intuitive to tell AI what you want.
But that's not enough.
The second one is what we've been talking about, the思辨能力,
which is to make a judgment.
Judgment what?
Judgment what AI gives you.
Is it what you want?
These two abilities can be said to complement each other.
One can't be less.
Okay, next, in order to make it easier for everyone to get started,
we have three specific types of思辨能力.
Once you understand these three types,
you can immediately use them in your work.
It's really super practical.
The first one is also the most intuitive and easy to understand.
We call it the result of思辨.
In other words, it's to judge whether the product that AI finally gives out is good or not.
Its accuracy and value are all counted.
Simply put, it's to directly look at the results and evaluate the product.
How do you evaluate the product?
You can ask yourself a few questions as a check list.
Is this product actually right?
Is its structure and logic consistent?
Does it meet my initial requirements?
These are all very important.
But I think the most important question is,
did it really solve my problem?
Did it really tie me in?
Okay, the second type of思辨能力 is called process思辨.
This is more advanced.
It not only looks at the results,
but also the process and method for AI to get this result.
Why is this important?
Because if the task is very complicated,
you only look at the final answer.
In fact, you will be confused, right?
So we have to check whether the AI thinking process is reliable or not.
So in the process of cooperation,
we have to open our eyes and pay attention to some red light information.
For example, is the logic of AI strange?
Or is it always stuck in a small detail and can't turn over?
What's worse is that sometimes it will also beat the wall and repeat the same argument.
These problems are to be caught by process思辨.
Okay, the third type is more detailed.
It's called performance思辨.
It's not about the production,
it's not about the process,
but the quality of your interaction with AI itself.
To be honest,
how does it feel when you two work together?
Is it smooth?
So what we want to evaluate is the overall feeling of interaction.
Do you think this cooperation is smooth and efficient?
Or do you think it's stuck and nagging?
Is the way AI communicates with you helpful?
Do you understand it?
Is it right to change it?
If you make this interaction link smooth,
your cooperation relationship will get better and better.
Okay, so we've finished evaluating,
and then the most valuable part of the思辨能力 is here.
It's not over after evaluation,
but it's going to drive our next step.
In other words,
it's going to turn our judgment into a specific feedback
and form an ongoing cycle of progress.
Look, this is a complete co-operation cycle.
It's simple.
First, you use description to give instructions.
Second, AI produces the result for you.
Third, you use思辨 to evaluate the result.
Finally, fourth,
you give feedback according to your assessment
to adjust and optimize your next command.
This circle keeps turning and turning.
The quality of your cooperation will get better and better
like climbing stairs.
Okay, we've talked so much.
In fact, everything is back to the most important point.
That is,
no matter how strong and powerful AI will become in the future,
our human roles will always be indispensable.
There is a sentence here
that I think is really good.
It says,
through the cultivation of your思辨能力,
you can ensure that your cooperation with AI
is always led by human judgment.
That's right.
This is what we want.
This is the real effective way to use AI.
So, in the end,
the purpose of our efficient use of AI
is never to replace human thinking.
Absolutely not.
It's to enhance our thinking.
And this思辨能力
is the key skill
that allows us to sit firmly on the driver's seat
in this human-machine cooperation relationship.
Finally,
I also want to leave a question for you.
You can think about it.
When you work with AI,
you are the only one
who can make that unique judgment.
What is it?
I think the answer to this question
may be the most important value
you have in this age of AI.